docs: v2 data engine sharding (#1408)
longhorn/website: content/docs/1.13.0/advanced-resources/v2-data-engine/sharding.md

---
title: Sharding with Erasure Coding (Experimental)
weight: 60
---

> **Note**: This feature is **Experimental** and should only be used for evaluation and testing. It is not recommended for production use.

Starting with v1.12.1, the Longhorn V2 Data Engine supports **sharding** as an alternative data protection strategy to replication.

> With replication, every replica holds a full copy of the volume. A volume can never be larger than a single disk or node, and its usable capacity is only `1 / numberOfReplicas` of the disk space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With replication, every replica stores a full copy of the volume data. Longhorn uses thin provisioning and supports over-provisioning, allowing the configured volume size to exceed the currently available physical storage. However, each replica is stored on a single disk, so the actual data written to a volume cannot exceed the available capacity of the disk hosting each replica. With n replicas, storing `x` bytes of user data consumes approximately `n × x` bytes of physical storage.
```

> With sharding, Longhorn splits the volume into `k` data chunks and `m` parity chunks, using Reed-Solomon coding, and places each of those `k + m` chunks on a different node. No single node holds a full copy. So a volume can grow larger than any one disk or node, and you use less disk space to survive the same number of failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With sharding, Longhorn uses erasure coding to encode written data into `k` data chunks and `m` parity chunks, which are distributed across different nodes. Unlike replication, no node stores a complete copy of the volume. This enables a volume to scale beyond the capacity of a single disk while requiring less physical storage than replication to tolerate the same number of failures.
```

> A sharded volume tolerates the loss of up to `m` chunks at once and keeps working. While chunks are missing, the volume stays readable and writable. Longhorn rebuilds the missing data from the remaining chunks and builds a replacement chunk in the background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A sharded volume can tolerate the loss of up to `m` chunks while remaining available. When chunks are unavailable, the volume continues to serve read and write operations using the remaining chunks and parity information. Longhorn reconstructs the missing data and rebuilds the lost chunks in the background.
```

---
title: Sharding with Erasure Coding (Experimental)
weight: 60
---

> **Note**: This feature is **Experimental** and should only be used for evaluation and testing.
> It is not recommended for production use.

Starting with v1.12.1, the Longhorn V2 Data Engine supports **sharding** as an alternative
data protection strategy to replication.

With replication, every replica holds a full copy of the volume. A volume can never be larger

> than a single disk, and its usable capacity is only `1 / numberOfReplicas` of the disk space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With replication, every replica holds a full copy of the volume. A volume can never be larger than a single disk or node, and its usable capacity is only `1 / numberOfReplicas` of the available disk space.
```

Author: Partially accepted. Dropped `available`: the ratio is `usable / total space consumed`, not `usable / free space`.

Reviewer 2: Sound good.

With sharding, Longhorn splits the volume into `k` data chunks and `m` parity
chunks, using Reed-Solomon coding, and places each of those `k + m` chunks on a different node.
No single node holds a full copy. So a volume can grow larger than any one disk or node,
and you use less disk space to survive the same number of failures.

A sharded volume tolerates the loss of up to `m` chunks at once and keeps working. While
chunks are missing, the volume stays readable and writable. Longhorn rebuilds the missing data

> from the chunks that are still there, and builds a replacement chunk in the background.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A sharded volume tolerates the loss of up to `m` chunks at once and keeps working. While
chunks are missing, the volume stays readable and writable. Longhorn rebuilds the missing data from the remaining chunks and rebuilds the replacement chunk in the background.
```

## Sharding compared to replication

| Aspect              | Replication (RAID1)                      | Sharding (Erasure Coding)           |
| ------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| Usable capacity     | `1 / numberOfReplicas` of the disk space | `k / (k + m)` of the disk space     |
| Maximum volume size | Limited to one disk or node              | Can be larger than one disk or node |

> | Fault tolerance     | up to `numberOfReplicas - 1` failures    | up to `m` failures (`parityChunks`) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Fault tolerance     | Up to `numberOfReplicas - 1` failures    | up to `m` failures (`parityChunks`) |
```

| Recovery            | Full copy from a healthy replica         | Rebuild only the failed chunk       |
| CPU overhead        | Low                                      | Higher (encoding and decoding)      |
| Maturity            | Generally available                      | Experimental                        |

Here, *disk space* means the total space used to store the volume, counting every replica copy or
every data and parity chunk.

Examples:

- A `2 + 1` layout (`dataChunks: 2`, `parityChunks: 1`) survives one failure and lets you use
  **66%** of the disk space. Two replicas survive the same one failure but let you use only
  **50%**.
- A `4 + 2` layout survives two failures at once and lets you use **66%** of the disk space.
  Three replicas survive the same two failures but let you use only **33%**.

## Requirements

- **V2 Data Engine enabled.** Sharding only works with the V2 Data Engine.

> - **At least `k + m` nodes with schedulable V2 disks.** Each chunk needs its own node and a V2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **At least `k + m` nodes with schedulable V2 disks**. Each chunk requires its own node and a V2 (block-type) disk with sufficient capacity.
```

| `dataLayout.mode`         | `erasureCoding` for sharded volumes.                                                                                  |
| `dataLayout.dataChunks`   | Required for sharded volumes. The number of data chunks (`k`); at least 1.                                            |
| `dataLayout.parityChunks` | Required for sharded volumes. The number of parity chunks (`m`); at least 1. The volume tolerates up to `m` failures. |
| `dataLayout.stripSizeKB`  | Required for sharded volumes. Erasure-coding chunk size in KiB. Must be a power of two between 4 and 1024.            |

The total number of chunks (`dataChunks + parityChunks`) cannot be more than 32.

> **Note**: The data layout is immutable once the volume is created. You cannot switch a volume between
> `replicated` and `sharded`, and you cannot change `dataChunks`, `parityChunks`, or `stripSizeKB`
> later. A sharded volume always uses `numberOfReplicas: 1` and `dataLocality: disabled`, which
> Longhorn sets automatically.

## How to use

Create a sharded volume with a StorageClass that sets the `dataLayout.*` parameters, then

> reference it from a PersistentVolumeClaim. For the step-by-step manifests, see [Creating V2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a sharded volume by using a StorageClass that sets the `dataLayout.*` parameters, then reference the StorageClass from a PersistentVolumeClaim.For the step-by-step manifests, see [Creating V2
```

Longhorn Volumes with kubectl (sharding)](../../../nodes-and-volumes/volumes/create-volumes#creating-v2-longhorn-volumes-with-kubectl-sharding).

## Inspecting the shards

> Instead of replicas, a sharded volume uses two Longhorn resources:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of replicas, a sharded volume uses the following Longhorn resources:
```

- `ShardGroup` (short name `lhsg`): the erasure-coded array for the volume. Its state tells you
  the overall health of the array (`healthy`, `degraded`, `offline`, `rebuilding`, `growing`).
- `Shard` (short name `lhsd`): one member of the EC array. Its role is `data` or `parity`, and its
  state is `normal`, `failed`, or `replacing`.

List both with kubectl:

```bash
kubectl -n longhorn-system get shardgroup,shard
```

The `ShardGroup` shows the overall health and how many chunks have failed. Each `Shard` shows its
position in the group, its role (`data` or `parity`), the node it runs on, and its state.

## Reference

> Original GitHub issue for V2 Data Engine sharding: [GitHub Issue #1061](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/1061)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Original GitHub issue tracking V2 Data Engine sharding: [GitHub Issue #1061](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/1061)
```
